---
layout: page
title: Short Bio
subtitle: about me
---

[BSc in Computer Science](https://www.disi.unitn.it) and [MSc in
Bioinformatics](http://www.biocomp.unibo.it/lsbioinfo/), I am a PhD student at
the [Department of Computer Science and Engineering](http://cs.unibo.it),
University of Bologna. Member of the [Focus Research Team at INRIA (Sophia
Antipolis)](http://focus.cs.unibo.it) and the [SPACES research
group](http://www.cs.unibo.it/projects/spaces2017).

My PhD is supervised by [Professor Maurizio
Gabbrielli](http://www.cs.unibo.it/~gabbri/) and [Professor Ivan
Lanese](http://www.cs.unibo.it/~lanese). Our research interest focuses on
*Programming Languages* for *Distributed Systems*, and their impact on the
development of applications in Smart City scenarios. The European institution
[EIT Digital](https://www.eitdigital.eu/) and the Italian company [Engineering
SpA](https://www.eng.it) financially support my grant.

In 2018, the Head of the [Concurrency and Logic research
group](https://concurrency.sdu.dk) of the [Department of Mathematics and
Computer
Science](https://www.sdu.dk/en/Om_SDU/Institutter_centre/Imada_matematik_og_datalogi)
at the [University of Southern Denmark](https://www.sdu.dk/en/), [Professor
Fabrizio Montesi](https://www.fabriziomontesi.com), invited me in a research
project focusing on Programming Language Abstractions for Cloud and Embedded
Systems.

In addition to academic research activities, I am interested in
teaching-learning practices. In particular I am interested in the theory of
learning of Computer Science, in the concept of Education-as-a-Service (EaaS)
and Didactical Engineering (DE), as the study of techniques of design and
experimentation of teaching activities. In this regard I carry out activities
aimed at learning at Schools, Universities and Companies, concerning the use of
models of Artificial Intelligence.
