---
title: AI for Education, tools for dropout prediction
slug: student-dropout-prediction
categories: research
image: https://source.unsplash.com/NIuGLCC7q54
published: false
---

The digitalization and the exploitation of Artificial Intelligence techniques in
various fields has made it possible to improve services delivered to people and
to solve many problems. Education and learning fields can benefit from these
kinds of technologies too.

<!-- è semplice pensare che il fenomeno di abbandono della carriera accademica
occorra quando il processo di apprendimento fallisce. Dobbiamo però essere pronti
a mettere in dubbio questa assunzione. -->

Several variables have to be taken into account when developing a model for
reasoning on learning processes. Among the different observable phenomena in the
learning process, we focused on student's dropout, which is a negative
circumstance for both the students and institutions (in our case the
University). But, students' dropout is yet too complex to be fully exploited,
and educationl data mining could come to an hand.

To enable a better comprehension of this complex event, we developed
DOCtor, a tool exploiting a machine learning model to predict the dropout
occurrence of a student, based on his/her personal data - e.g., age and gender -
and academic records - e.g., high school geographical region and score -
available at the moment of the application.

<!-- Machine learning techniques permit the extraction of meaningful and complex
patterns from a collection of data and we used some of them to find correlations
in data and dropout occurrences. Our tool is trained on data of students
enrolled at the first year at the University of Bologna, but it can be
generalized for similar contexts. Beyond the dropout prediction, the importance
of this tool stays in the possibility of being integrated in other services. For
instance, integrating the tool in the institutions’ web pages, it can be
possible to detect a risky student and to advise him/her to take support courses
or alternative less risky academic paths to actively prevent the dropout since
the earliest stages of the academic career. -->

Concretely, the tool permits to have an estimation of the student risk to quit
the University course during his/her first year.

As a minor contribution we remark that the tool can be easily integrated, e.g.,
in existing recommender systems, since its implementation follows the service
oriented principles exposing a web-service with REST API.

For instance, integrating the tool in the application process, it can be
possible to detect a risky student and to advise him/her to take support courses
or alternative less risky academic paths to actively prevent the dropout since
the earliest stages of the academic career.

The tool is available _open source_ under the [GNU General Public License
v3.0](https://github.com/spaces-team/DOCtor/blob/master/LICENSE) on
[**GitHub**](https://github.com/spaces-team/doctor).
