---
title: Machine Learning @ Bologna Business School
image: https://source.unsplash.com/4W5WWKaxsKs
categories: teaching
published: true
language: english

---

### Machine Learning 
<p class="text-muted h4">Syllabus for Bologna Business School</p>
<p class="text-success h5">Academic Year: 2019/2020</p>

---

# Course Syllabus (updating...)

- *Course name* Machine Learning @ Bologna Business School
- *Teacher* Stefano Pio Zingaro (Università di Bologna)

## Contact Information

- *E-mail address* [stefanopio.zingaro \[at\] unibo.it](mailto:stefanopio.zingaro@unibo.it)
- *Office hours* by appointment

## Overall course description

The aim of the course is to unveil some basic concepts of machine learning for pattern recognition.
The subjects of the matter are the remarkable algorithms for machine learning, the techniques for data manipulation and
the tools for validating the behavioral model learned by the machine.
With the expression "data", we refer to the digital representations of information processed by IT systems.
Just as the learning of living beings - of a knowledge - takes advantage of the experience of representation, so, for
the machine, the digital representation of the object to "know", whether it is a concrete or abstract entity, feeds the
learning process.

Keeping this in mind, the course aims to provide the possible interpretations of the concepts of machine learning,
pattern recognition, training, categorization and generalization, from the Computer Science perspective.
Students will apply machine learning techniques from real data in order to concretize what they have seen or heard
during the frontal lectures or personal study.
The activities will be conducted both individually and in teamwork.
Finally, selected experts will present their experiences, both in the professional and academic fields, about the use of
machine learning techniques to solve concrete problems.

## Suggested reading material (pre-course)

The following list should be intended as a set of useful material to go deeper into the subject. These are NOT required
readings.
- _Weka_, guide to install and get Weka software running, available at
[https://waikato.github.io/weka-wiki/](https://waikato.github.io/weka-wiki/) or reading the Weka workbench PDF available
at
[https://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/Witten_et_al_2016_appendix.pdf](https://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/Witten_et_al_2016_appendix.pdf)
(only the first part but it can be used as a reference for using Weka in the future).
- Deploying machine learning applications in the Enterprise - Peter Norvig, at USI on Youtube.com,
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ2QVzGmb2w](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJ2QVzGmb2w).
- B. D’Amore, “Pipe, cavalli, triangoli e significati. Contributo ad una teoria problematica del significato
concettuale, da Frege e Magritte, ai giorni nostri,” L’insegnamento della Mat. e delle Sci. Integr., vol. 28B, no. 5,
pp. 415–433, 2005.
- **Spanish version:** B. D’Amore, “Pipas, caballos, triángulos y significados. Contribución a una teoría problemática
del significado conceptual, de Frege y Magritte, hasta nuestros días,” Números, vol. 61, pp. 3–18, 2005.
- A. Clark and C. Thornton, "Trading spaces: Computation, representation, and the limits of uninformed learning," Behav.
Brain Sci., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 57–66, Mar. 1997.

## Reference books (for the course)

The following list should be intended as a set of useful material to go deeper into the subject. These are NOT required
readings.
- C. Bishop, "Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning," J. Electron. Imaging, vol. 16, no. 4, p. 049901, Jan. 2007.
Chapters covered in this course are numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and extracts of 11. [Amazon link for the
book](https://t.co/F8VtwT4GIX).
- P. Norvig and S. Russell, "Artificial Intelligence: a Modern Approach," vol. 82, no. 1–2. 2010. This is the course
book for University of Bologna Master's course in Artificial Intelligence, helpful to go deeper into the Artificial
Intelligence world. [Amazon link for the book](https://t.co/hJQHbXKYv0).
- I. H. Witten, "Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques," 2016. This is the reference book for the
WEKA tool from University of Waikato, it contains a lot of useful example and tutorials. [Amazon link for the
book](https://t.co/r4m2K6nRzo).
- I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, "Deep Learning," vol. 26, no. 7553. 2016. Mathematical background chapter
could be helpful in case students lack some algebraic notion. [Amazon link for the book](https://t.co/b4xGJJfEnJ).

## Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)

Here, we present those ILOs of the **Master in Digital Technology Management** (from
[here](https://www.bbs.unibo.eu/hp/master-fulltime/digital-technology-management-artificial-intelligence-2/#struttura)),
that are coherent with the objectives of this academic course.

1. How to possibly <mark>solve the issues</mark> faced in novel Industry 4.0 scenarios with Machine Learning;
2. <mark>Understand [...] implications</mark> of Machine Learning in modern businesses;
3. Promote and support a transition to machine-based solutions [...] to <mark>improve production</mark> and organization
dynamics;
4. <mark>Judge the applicability</mark> of a selected set of Machine Learning techniques, and related tools, in
different situations.

At the end of the course, graduates will be able to:
- use a wide range of instruments with programming and analysis tools, including open source Data Analytics software;
- carry on a business data analysis and choose between the various statistical methods available;
- evaluate the results of an analysis and choose how to present them depending on the target audience.

Matching with the UN’s [SDG](https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/):
- Goal 5: Gender Equality
- Goal 10: Reducing Inequalities
- Goal 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions

## Student assessment

Marks are intended on a numerical grade scale (0 to 30), being 18 to 30 the passing grade range.
The following is an example of a students’ assessment method for a course.
Please refer to the official guide for more information about the student assessment methods and criteria.

| TYPE OF ASSESSMENT | DUE DATE | WEIGHT ON FINAL GRADE |
| ------------------ | -------- | --------------------- |
| Team presentation | 22nd, April | 40% |
| Individual participation | Throughout the entire course | 10% |
| Final Examination | Last session of the course | 50% |

## Content & handouts

All lectures are intended to be split in two parts:
1. **Theoretical foundations** of the topic;
2. Application of the theory in **laboratorial activities**.

| # | Date (2020) | Topic + Slides deck |
| :-: | :----------: | ------------------- |
| 8 | 22nd, April | (<sup>^</sup>) _teamwork presentation and examination_ |
| 7 | 15th, April | (<sup>^</sup>) _Machine learning business experience_ |
| 6 | 8th, April | Focus on unsupervised and semi-supervised techniques |
| 5 | 6th, April | Probabilistic methods and graphical models |
| 4bis | 1st, April | [A few practical problems (M. Lombardi)](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/EYI5o-9IVSFCkyw9DagUc7UBq7UgOk_n8Vg5PBnGSfub_w?e=FRdgV3) |
| 4 | 1st, April | [Ethical issues in AI (a digression)](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:p:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/ES2f8za89fdFrW6iJUWD76EBrSgw3ZlkLL0hCx14Mm6RMg?e=hXjTFe) |
| 3 | 30th, March | [Models and Errors - When does a Machine learn?](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:p:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/Ec0WRxnqdR5Jna4LTnXommgBvn98e71haixNI7tpoJxwzg?e=oxexuD) |
| 2 | 26th, March | [Definitions (a first attempt...)](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:p:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/ET8LHwj40ctOhXvjMmHzNsABnP7itTBWIHpGjX2IW3M9sQ?e=BpyYgu) |
| 1 | 23rd, March | [Presentation of the course and Introductions](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:p:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/EcQQRQ7WkoJIga7m4M2motkBDefD0vCrADQBgJAberBVeg?e=ES16t5) |

(<sup>^</sup>) _topic is intended to be decided yet_

### Other material

The lab materials (handouts, code snippet, datasets, etc.) are provided into a folder with subdirectories for each lab session [at this link](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/ElNv2SEV_sdFsOWBnvBmfQUBVKIW7PIJVLQnoLwycrBlyA?e=KaJ3QB).

[Check out this link](https://liveunibo-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/stefanopio_zingaro_unibo_it/Eg8s0m6Lr2dJnNw3_l1wYQgB7oNxm3WZFE-9XftOOha9Aw?e=UhOreX) for supplementary materials in case you are interested in exploring ML techniques on peculiar datasets or testing your skills on statistical computing. 

## Honor Code

We strongly encourage students to form study groups.
Students may discuss and work on homework problems in groups.
However, each student must write down the solutions independently, and without referring to written notes from the joint
session (<sup>*</sup>).

In other words, each student must understand the solution well enough in order to reconstruct it by him/herself.
In addition, each student should write on the problem the set of people with whom s/he collaborated.
Further, since we occasionally reuse problem questions from previous years, we expect students not to copy, refer to, or
look at the solutions in preparing their answers.

It is an honor code violation to intentionally refer to a previous year's solutions.
This applies both to the official solutions and to solutions that you or someone else may have written up in a previous
year.

(<sup>*</sup>) _inspired by_ [the Stanford University honor
code](https://communitystandards.stanford.edu/policies-and-guidance/honor-code)

### Plagiarism

Plagiarism is an academic fraud consisting of attributing authorship by (partial or total) copying, imitation or
misappropriation.

Examples of academic fraud committed by students are the followings:
- Appropriating written or oral work to themselves when they are not the author (in whole or in part) of the work, by
omitting any references or quotations to the author or to the owner of the work;
- Presenting data that has been falsified or invented in any way;
- Appropriate the work of someone else and presenting it as the own;
- Including exerts of texts, images, results from external sources without mentioning the source of the document;
- Citing the original idea of an author by expressing it in their own words but omit quoting the source;
- Cheating in an academic evaluation.

All students completing this course should be aware that in submitting any assignment for this course, you agree to the
following declaration:

_"I certify that the coursework that I have submitted is entirely my own unaided work, and that I have read and complied
with the School’s guidelines on plagiarism and referencing as set out in the School handbook.
I understand that the School may make use of plagiarism detection software and that my work may therefore be stored on a
database which is accessible to other users of the same software."_

Students should be aware that, where plagiarism is suspected, a formal investigation may be carried out under the
School’s Student Disciplinary Procedure.
This may result in penalties ranging from mark deduction to expulsion from the School.
