---
title: Machine Learning @ Bologna Business School
categories: education
---

# Course Syllabus

## Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
Here, we present those ILOs of the **Master in Digital Technology Management** (from [here](https://www.bbs.unibo.eu/hp/master-fulltime/digital-technology-management-artificial-intelligence-2/#struttura)), that are coherent with the objectives of this academic course.

1. How to possibly <mark>solve the issues</mark> faced in novel Industry 4.0 scenarios with "new technologies";
2. <mark>understand [...] implications</mark> of Artificial Intelligence in modern businesses;
3. promote and support a transition to machine-based solutions [...] to <mark>improve production</mark> and organization dynamics;
4. <mark>judge the applicability</mark> of a wide range of Artificial Intelligence tools in different situations.

- Contenuti/ (link)
- Testi e Bibliografia
- Metodi didattici
- Valutazione

## Syllabus

|  #  | Topic + Slides deck |
| :-: | ------------------- |
|  6  | [to be defined](#)  |
|  5  | [to be defined](#)  |
|  4  | [to be defined](#)  |
|  3  | [to be defined](#)  |
|  2  | [to be defined](#)  |
|  1  | [to be defined](#)  |
|  0  | [to be defined](#)  |

# Risorse Esterne

- Libri di testo
- Siti Ufficiali
- Datasets

# Risorse Interne

- Dispense/Slides
- Handouts

# Valutazione delle Conoscenze Acquisite

- Modalità d'esame
- Testi di riferimento
- Risultati delle prove

# Contatti

- Orari di ricevimento
- Mailing list o Piazza forum

# Honor Code (from Standford)

We strongly encourage students to form study groups.
Students may discuss and work on homework problems in groups.
However, each student must write down the solutions independently, and without referring to written notes from the joint session.
In other words, each student must understand the solution well enough in order to reconstruct it by him/herself.
In addition, each student should write on the problem the set of people with whom s/he collaborated.
Further, since we occasionally reuse problem questions from previous years, we expect students not to copy, refer to, or look at the solutions in preparing their answers.
It is an honor code violation to intentionally refer to a previous year's solutions.
This applies both to the official solutions and to solutions that you or someone else may have written up in a previous year.
